>> James, welcome to the podcast. Welcome to YouTube. And talk Python in a moment.
>> Thank you for having me, Michael. >> It's fantastic to have you here. We're
going to have a great time. People out on the live stream, thank you for being here.
If you've got comments, questions, throw them into the live stream. If you're watching later,
thanks for watching later. All right. Ready to kick this off, James?
>> Yes. >> Right on. James, welcome to talk Python
Normally I talk Python to computers, Michael, but this will be a first.
You are a human, right?
I am.
Well, you know, you've got to ask ChatGCP about that.
We'll see.
You know, there's a lot of people who are interested in talking about Python.
When I first put this podcast together, I thought, well, who's going to be the target
audience?
I thought people were really into Python.
People make things like Flask and stuff.
kind of a big part of the world, but there's a ton of people who are scientists or just
curious about programming who listen as well.
So it really surprised me how many people you can talk Python to and how much they seem
to appreciate it.
So it's cool.
Indeed.
Yeah, but I also spend a fair amount of time talking Python to computers as well.
Sometimes more fun, sometimes more frustrating.
You never know.
Yes, we're familiar with that.
I'm sure.
this extra angle of it's not just talking to pure software, right, that lives in an
internet API vacuum, but you have physical things, many, many physical
things in radio astronomy and large arrays of telescopes and receivers and
as we're going to talk about, lots of different things. And I think that's one
of the really interesting aspects of this episode to talk to you is, you know,
Python against real world things out there and real time as well.
Yes, so I can talk a little bit about that.
Yeah. So perhaps sort of to jump back and put the listeners in a bit of context, I work at the South African Radio Astronomy Observatory.
Observatory and our sort of primary project is called Meerkat. It's a
precursor of one of the world's biggest radio telescopes which is
planned. So the project is called SKA, so it stands for Square
Kilometer Array, which refers to the size of the collecting area of the telescope
that will eventually be built. It's in its beginning stages now and that has a
lot of moving parts. Right from the actual antennas that are pointing
into the sky and recording radio emissions from the universe somewhere,
through down to the point where a scientist actually sits down with a data
product in order to to analyze and to write his paper that he's hoping to
publish and win his Nobel Prize. And so everything from the
beginning of the end there needs some software control and Python is the
the sort of weapon of choice for all of those applications.
Yeah it's pretty interesting to see what you're talking about, you gave a couple
presentations at PyCon South Africa? ZD? That's right, yes. Last year. Yeah, fantastic. And people
all of course link to those in the show notes and people can check them out. You got a lot of
cool graphics and stuff there. I think the fact that you built this real-time aspect involving
Python, which is not normal use perhaps, I think is really something that we're going to have a
a good time talking about as well as just how do you test something like a
large receiver array rather than you know is the user logged in the database
yes or no and let's mock that out right this is both I think very similar and
yet very different right yes it can be and there are there's a lot that you can
do but there's also some interesting gotchas which we can talk
about there. So I mean I don't know where you want to want to start. Well let's
let's get a real quick introduction with you before we get too far
down in this topic and so tell people how you got into programming and
astronomy and all that kind of stuff. Well programming, well both of those have
become, both of those started out as hobbies and they've sort of become my
job, which means I don't do them as a hobby anymore, which is always fun. When I
was younger in school I made the mistake during a summer holiday of telling my
dad that I was bored and so he handed me a book and this book was
Programming in C I think, I forget exactly and being young and naive I
thought this was a great idea and started working my way through it.
Since then I've been programming more or less continuously. It was sort of the
mid to late 2000s that Python started to become more prominent and I picked that
up and haven't looked back. Astronomy was also another hobby. In my student days I
spent many South African, cold South African nights looking at the
stars and a job opportunity opened up at Sareo to do electronic engineering, which was the
field that I trained in university.
That was about seven years ago and so I've been combining these sort of programming and
electronic engineering and my astronomy hobby, which has shifted now into radio instead of
optical.
But yeah, I basically come from there.
- Fantastic.
I remember getting a book and see if they get on,
I'm gonna learn programming and then read it like,
okay, this, I know it's pretty young.
Okay, this is a little bit much to bite off at the moment,
but came back to as well.
But that's how it was, right?
We used to get books, free internet, YouTube,
and where you just fired up and say,
teach me programming in the next half hour.
with listings of code and you have to type them in
and then you miss a semicolon somewhere
and scratch your head for half a day.
(laughing)
- That's right.
- But I think that was a good preparation though.
I mean, as great as Python is, it is somewhat high level
and I think it's helpful to have a sort of a,
even if you don't often work at that level,
to have an understanding of what's going on
at a slightly lower level.
- It is, I think it's valuable to know
and it's valuable to have that experience,
but I'm also, even though I did it professionally
a couple years. Happy that I'm not. I don't have to continuously work at that level, right?
You can just be so more productive and higher level language on Python.
Totally.
Yeah. So I think you introduced this a little bit, but tell people about Serrao, this project.
How'd you get to that place?
Yeah. Serrao, well, I got there by responding to a job advert and interviewing and what
have you. Sareo sort of started out as a response to the international kind of
scientific project to build a square kilometer array telescope. The idea
is to make it the most sensitive radio telescope that has ever been built and
when you're doing that kind of project you want to build it in an ideal setting
just like optical telescopes if you want to do proper science you want to do it
far away from cities where there's no light pollution.
Similarly, radio telescopes, you want to do them
where there's no radio interference.
So cell phones, TV signals, Wi-Fi, that kind of stuff.
The Southern Hemisphere also has a bit of an advantage
in that we can see parts of the galaxy
that the Northern Hemisphere can't.
And so, you know, as this project progressed,
various sites were identified,
and ultimately the decision was made to put part of the telescope in South Africa and
part of it in Australia.
And Sareo is really just the organization around developing the South African part of
that telescope.
So that's where we are.
It's a very cool project.
I think a square kilometer array of telescope, that's pretty impressive, right?
Also something that's much easier to do with radio than with optical. Yes, so
when it comes to telescopes bigger is better but there reaches a point of
where building a bigger one becomes expensive and very difficult and
so a trick that you can use in radio is called interferometry. So if you
have, if you measure your radio waves at different points and you measure them in
phase with each other or what they call coherently, then you can get away with
with making a lot of smaller telescopes to build up the same kind of area which
will give you the same effect as a bigger one but much cheaper
because you can do a lot of smaller cheaper telescopes. That in a
nutshell is really why these telescope arrays exist. It's very difficult to do
that with optical telescopes because the wavelength is so short, the frequency is so high that
getting the, it is possible, it can be done, but getting the signal coherent or in phase
is very, very difficult.
So that's why we do it in radio.
Yeah, you don't have much time, there's not much of a gap between how you've got to coordinate
the signals across the radio, but it's even worse in optical.
Exactly, exactly.
Nice. So people who listened to the episode about imaging the black hole, we
talked a lot about that. So I don't necessarily need to think we need to
cover too much depth about it. But one thing I think that people might find
interesting is I think remember from your talk that you said this is part,
some of the work that you're doing is part of the deep space network for
communicating with, is that right, with NASA? The South African radio astronomy has its origins in
the deep space network, so if you're trying to communicate with spacecraft that are outside of
Earth orbit, you need a very powerful, something that looks a bit like a radio telescope, except
that you're transmitting as well, because you need to be able to talk to the, you know, Voyager or
or your Mars rover that's out there in space.
But very inconveniently for scientific purposes,
the Earth rotates.
So for about a third of the day,
if you have a telescope in California, for example,
I think is where one of NASA's big ones are,
half of the day you can't really talk to your spaceships.
So NASA built a network of telescopes around the world
and one was in Australia and one was here in South Africa.
And some of the early Mars missions
were actually used the telescope in South Africa
for communication.
But that was, I think in the 70s,
I forget my history exactly,
but they got a better one in Spain.
And so the one in South Africa was kind of converted
into a facility just for science.
And it's been operated by our National Research Foundation,
which evolved into Sareo for the last sort of few years.
And that's what kind of gave us our leg up.
- Yeah, exactly.
That it was already built and it was there.
And you're like, you know what?
Instead of just let it, put it on mothballs,
why don't you guys do science with it, right?
That's cool.
- And we've been using it quite well since then.
They've done, I wouldn't say groundbreaking science.
I don't know that any Nobel prizes have happened,
but we have some good radio astronomers originating
from South Africa that have used data from this telescope.
So, yeah.
>> Excellent.
All right, let's talk about first the real-time aspect,
this thing that you focus on called the correlator, right?
And maybe give us this side of the story
because I think this alone is pretty interesting,
what you've built here with Python, you and your team.
>> So, from a conceptual point of view,
In the episode a few weeks ago where you interviewed Dr. Sarah Essoon, I don't know if I'm pronouncing
her name correctly, the Event Horizon telescope worked by pointing different telescopes around
the world at the same object.
All radio telescopes arrays, whether they're very long baseline like what she used or much
shorter, have something called a correlator and this is the thing that basically combines
the signals from the individual telescopes in a way that enables downstream users, so
scientists, to actually make sense of this data. So in order for that to work, the data
needs to be in phase, it needs to be coherent, and at very long baselines they do this by
having each station having their very own atomic clock to generate very precise reference
signals.
- As a reminder, sorry, just as a reminder
for people maybe didn't hear that episode is,
you know, the earth is curved, as we all know, hopefully,
and the radio waves come in, and as it hits that sphere,
they hit the different parts of the array,
it's more spread out, it is even more exaggerated,
but it hits the different parts of the array
at different times, and so you have to offset
those back in the signal to say,
well, it came in at this angle,
and it came in at this time, and the speed of light says,
this one is, you know, a nanosecond behind that one,
So you've got to figure out how to realign those so it looks
like a flat surface that they hit all simultaneously to look
like a single picture, right?
>> Exactly.
>> That's basically the job of this thing.
>> So partially, you can do the first bit with just with geometry.
We know what the rotation of the earth is.
We know where our different telescopes are.
And so we can calculate roughly what the time difference will be.
The job of the correlator is once you've got those signals
and you've applied your sort of rough delay offset
to each of those signals,
the correlator will find the correlations
between the incoming signals
simply by multiplying the signals together.
Mathematically, it's not terribly complicated.
It's really just multiplication of each pair of antennas.
But it's with that, you may remember your,
from your high school mathematics,
the trigonometric identity.
When you multiply two sine waves together,
you get a sum and a difference product.
And it's a similar kind of concept,
applying to not just to abstract sine waves,
but to radio waves that are, you know,
have at various frequencies.
The main engineering challenge is just doing this fast enough
for practical purposes.
So in the example of the Event Horizon Telescope
with very long baseline interferometry,
it's not possible to do it in real time
because your individual elements are just too far apart.
You can't get all the data together.
So--
- Not for math, but because the actual data quantity,
getting them all back and forth across the world is--
- Exactly, exactly.
So there's specialized hardware that takes those signals
and writes them basically just straight onto hard drives.
Then these hard drives are physically taken to a central location.
I think Sarah did talk about that in her episode.
And then --
>> It was Boston and maybe Cambridge and London.
>> One was in Europe, yes.
>> No, that's the Institute in Germany is what it was, I believe.
>> That's right, yeah.
One was in the States, one was in Europe.
Yes, and so -- and then the same --
well, similar equipment does the reverse process.
It reads the data off and then it basically batch processes it.
This happens in software, so you cross multiply all of the signals together.
And that's great if you have a limited number of telescopes, you know,
up to a few dozen or so as with Event Horizon Telescope.
In the Meerkat case, we've got 64 of them and we're building a few more.
And as it becomes the full square kilometer array,
we're going to be talking about hundreds
or possibly even thousands
of individual telescope elements.
So recording everything onto a hard drive
at that data rate becomes impractical.
So the approach that we take is we use
what we call a real-time correlator.
It processes and reduces the data
as a sort of first stage in real-time, live,
before recording to the disk.
And as a part of that step, we integrate for a little while.
So if you think about it from the point of view,
if you've done some photography at nighttime,
you want to do a long exposure,
so you open your camera shutter for a long time
to get more signal, it's very similar to that.
So we would integrate over half a second or a second
or eight seconds, and that gives you a much reduced,
there's still a lot of data that comes out
of the other side, but it's much, much smaller
than if you were recording straight onto hard drives
from the telescope the way that they do
in Event Horizon Telescope.
>> Right. That is interesting.
I guess it is just like taking a picture,
just a different frequency, right?
But same basic idea?
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
>> Nice. And so there's a lot of data coming through here.
You talked about how Event Horizon couldn't even ship it
around the world quick enough or, you know,
even though they're very, very far apart, pretty remote.
But there's a lot of data here.
And so maybe give people a sense of the data center.
Excuse me, give people a sense of the data center.
And like, you've got this array of,
I don't remember how many of these correlators,
server, U1, slice.
>> Yeah.
>> It's not one corner, PC in the corner, is it?
>> No, no.
Although, the way the technology progresses, maybe one day.
No, so our current generation correlator uses
an FPGA based computing platform.
We call it SCARAB.
There's a bit of a tradition to name radio astronomy
compute things after insects.
So the previous generation one was called ROACH.
This one is called SCARAB.
They stand for something, reconfigurable open architecture
for computing hardware, I think was the ROACH.
And Scarab, the first three letters are S-K-A.
Yeah, there we go, there's the Scarab.
And what that is, is an FPGA is a field programmable
gate array, so it's a little piece of reconfigurable
silicon that has, it's like having a hardware
accelerated signal processing.
It's very fast, and it's wired straight into Ethernet
for interconnect, so in our data center in the Karoo,
In South Africa, we've got about 280
of these individual scarabs,
and each of them has a role to play
in the signal processing pipeline.
They talk to each other via ethernet,
and they're controlled by a central master controller
computer that runs Python.
So it uses an asynchronous little routine
to coordinate the activities of each of these scarabs.
The processing parameters need to be updated
from time to time.
So for example, as the Earth turns,
the geometric delay between a given pair of telescopes
will change slightly,
and so that gets updated periodically in the Scarab,
so that it can carry on processing the data
at the full rate that the telescope is taking data in.
So to give you an idea of that,
telescope is producing data at about 35 gigabit per second. 35 gigabit a second?
Yeah, times 64. Yeah, that's a lot of data. After the processing, the
other end of the correlator, so we get about four or five gigabit per second, so
that's reduced due to kind of the long exposure effect, it's averaged over a
a few seconds, so it's four or five gigabits per second out the other end, and then that
gets stored on hard drives for processing and imaging so that scientists can do their
science later on.
But that's the initial stage of the signal processing pipeline.
So you've got 64 of these running in concert.
What does uptime in DevOps look like for you all?
Is this continuously 24 hours a day recording or is it offline for a certain number of hours?
Yes, it is.
And the limiting fact I'm happy to say is usually not the correlator.
We don't need all 280 scarabs to run.
We can run with about 190 of them with full science capability, so there is capacity for
spares.
And when you have a system with this many moving parts, there is downtime.
actually need to go and change the oil in the motors on the telescope and you
know routine maintenance kinds of things like that. So I don't remember our
numbers exactly but I believe it's above 75% of the time that the
telescope is busy and doing science. This is more recent, it's only in the last
sort of few years that the technology platform has become a bit more
mature. In the early stages it was really still sort of engineering
commissioning, but I think we're using above 75% of time now
for actual science observations.
>> That's pretty impressive
for considering all the pieces involved.
And what are these scarabs?
Each one is basically assigned
to an individual telescope part of the array?
>> Partially.
So the first one will do what is called channelization.
So it's much easier to operate on narrow signals of, you know,
very close to a sine wave.
So the telescope will sample a little bit more
than a gigahertz worth of bandwidth,
and that will be chopped up into, you know,
a few thousand channels.
Then those channels will get sort of dished out,
and another scarab later on will cross multiply
the corresponding frequency channels
from every single telescope together.
So this architecture is called FX,
so first frequency channelization,
then cross-correlation, before you get your ultimate product which gets stored in the
archive and on which then further science processing is done.
People start to ask questions and draw graphs and things.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So, one of the parts that you employ to make this run fast is, I think you said you use
CUDA cores on NVIDIA GPUs or something like that, is that right?
Do I remember this correctly?
- Yes, that's right.
So the Scarab that you showed on the screen,
that's our previous, well, previous but current generation
correlator is working on that platform.
It has its pros and cons.
It's kind of a bespoke piece of hardware.
It is reconfigurable, but there are not that many customers
for this particular board.
The problem with doing your own hardware
that it takes a lot of time, particularly if you're an organization that you want to
do science.
So for the next expansion of Meerkat, to build more antennas we need more processing capability
to be able to handle more bandwidth.
We've kind of figured out that where they are now, GPUs can do the work.
GPUs have actually been powerful enough to do the work for a while now.
The problem has actually been the memory bandwidth to actually get your
data from your telescope onto your GPU to do the number crunching. So for
Scarab it was very easy. It has some 40 gigabit Ethernet and that's wired
straight into the FPGA, so there's no operating system taking its time, there's
no PCI Express that needs to be negotiated.
The data just comes straight off the network
and it can do its processing.
Previously computers were not fast enough
to get the numbers on and off the card.
But since PCIe 4 has become a thing
and sort of the GeForce RTX 3000 series cards
which we're using PCIe 4, we can do it on GPUs now.
So we haven't deployed one yet.
we, what I spoke about is the prototype
that we've developed.
But that's--
- Part Python and part CUDA, right?
- Yes, yes.
So the CUDA is actually quite small.
As I mentioned earlier, the processing is quite simple.
So there's a stage for channelizing.
So that uses a piece of math called a Fourier transform.
And there's been years of research gone into that
to make it very computationally efficient.
very fast. The other part is simply multiplying lots of numbers together and
that's something that GPUs are really really good at. So we've made good use of
technology advances driven by things like AI and machine learning which
relies on really large matrix multiplications. So we just piggyback
off of that technology and the bonus is we don't have to develop our
own hardware anymore which is nice. And those things are only getting faster
right if you could have done it on a 3070 or whatever nvidia 3070 then you know it's getting
faster and going to get easier and easier as things go you might need to give you a power
generator to run one of those cards these days they're kind of insane but the the 30 series are
a little bit easier than the 40 series to give you an idea in our prototype system we're using
3070 TI's at the moment and one of those GPUs does the work of four scarabs.
Wow. So it's the rate that technology moves forward. To be fair the scarab is
about six or seven years old it was revolutionary at the time but you know
commercial technology has moved forward a lot. Yeah it sure has. You talked, just a
bit of a sidebar, you talked about the one of the challenges being getting the
data in and out of the GPUs from a bandwidth perspective. Do things like
systems on a chip and this Apple unified memory where the bandwidth, the memory of
the CPU is the memory of the GPU, have you guys considered playing with
that? Is that interesting? We have had a look. So Apple's model is
something that's not really reached mainstream yet and Apple doesn't really
sell a computer in a form factor that would be amenable to deployment in a
data center environment. You have to put a bunch of minis on their edge or something.
Exactly, yes. So it's something that we've got an eye on but we haven't
got a usable kind of hardware prototype at this point. So we're currently
using AMD EPYC platforms. They have lots of PCIe lanes and lots of memory
channels so that lets you get data on and off from your network to your GPU
very quickly and advances such as direct memory addressing and other such things
I forget all the terminology now but basically the faster that you can get
it off into the GPU's RAM
so that the GPU can do its thing the better.
>> Yeah. It's an interesting trade-off to consider
because the GPUs, even in the new higher-end Apple stuff,
it's still quite a bit slower than NVIDIA.
But the memory is instant, so where's that trade-off
across the line? It's going to be interesting
as this kind of architecture evolves.
>> Yeah. We've definitely got eyes on that,
and we'll see how it goes.
- All right, for doing the CUDA stuff,
what's the Python side look like?
Is that, what libraries are you using and stuff?
- So the Python, that's got to kind of do every,
so the GPUs are very good at crunching numbers,
but they're not very good at anything else.
So there's a lot of steps in that for a GPU
to be able to do all of those calculations.
You have a high-speed network, 100 gigabit, 200 gigabit.
that's very fast.
And so you need software to be able to
run your network stack, receive data,
and that comes into system RAM.
You need to be able to DMA it into the GPU's memory.
You need to be able to know when the work is finished
so that you can copy the data back,
packet that up in Ethernet packets again and send it out.
And so there's a lot of things that we use in Python
to enable that.
The first and most sort of obvious one
would be a library called PyCuda,
which allows you to wrap up Cuda functions
in a nice Python handle and interact with your GPU
in a way that's more amenable to Python code.
There we go, that's the one.
- Yeah, very cool.
- So, the other one,
the thing that you've got to think about carefully then
is coordinating your activities
when your GPU is executing,
CUDA calls the streams,
if you're working in an OpenCL kind of abstraction,
it calls it command queues.
So you can, they work almost like threads on a computer.
So you need to have some sort of way of coordinating
so that when you start one calculation,
you've got to make sure that the data is there,
that it can work on it.
And similarly, you don't want to start copying it back
before the calculation has finished.
So PyCuda makes this quite easy.
You can use, I think, Nvidia calls it events.
But they're basically semaphores and markers
to help you to coordinate between your different threads
for sending, processing, and receiving data from the GPU.
And similarly getting it off the network
and onto the network again.
So, Paikuda is-- - Yeah, another thing
that you spoke, yeah, Paikuda looks great.
Another thing you spoke about that was pretty interesting
is your use of async and await
to do all the network stuff, - Yes.
- which I think is, it's clearly a good choice
and fits right here, but I feel like a lot of people
So consider it fast enough or great enough.
- Network, but not just that, also the GPU.
So you have a few functions and they're running loops.
So the way that we've structured our code,
and I'll share a link with you,
there's documentation in Read the Docs as well,
explaining this.
But we have one loop that just waits for traffic
to come in off the network, bundles it up.
And this is kind of one of the trick things
you need to do things in batches.
If you involve the Python interpreter,
every time a packet hits the NIC,
then it'll end up being very slow.
So we have a lower level library written in C++
that batches up a whole chunk
in the order of about 100 or 200 megabytes worth of data.
And you use that await keyword
to let you know when there's a chunk of data ready.
So when there's a chunk of data--
- You wait until enough is buffered up
and then you pull it back on the--
- Exactly.
- Or whatever, okay.
- Exactly, so you mark that for upload,
you put an event in the stream or the command queue,
and let that run.
And then in the next loop,
you're using the await,
so you're waiting for that event.
and when you see that you know that the data is uploaded to the GPU, you trigger the processing,
whichever processing task needs to happen, and put another event and then pass it on
to the next.
So the third loop waits for that final event, when it sees it, it knows that the processing
is done and you can initiate the copy of the GPU RAM back to the system and then you can
send and transmit that out on the network.
So those two things working in tandem, yeah.
- Yeah, I didn't expect the GPU to have this async interface
but it does make a lot of sense.
There's a lot of parallels within the GPU.
- I don't think that it's natively in PyCuda.
I think that's a wrapper that we've done around it.
It's been a little while
since I've touched that particular code
but there's no reason that you can't do that at all.
And it's approach that we find has been very, very useful.
- Okay, but your assessment overall
is that async and await, Python's async.io
has been a solid choice for this whole platform.
- I've seen this approach used in other places as well,
even since before async.io has been part of core Python,
using things like Flask or Tornado.
So the approach, it's a very good approach,
it's very helpful.
Debugging async stuff when it goes wrong
is a little bit more tricky,
but when it works, it works very, very well.
Yeah, that's for sure.
You get the Heisenbergs, keep it in the science space.
Okay, so--
Exactly.
Quick audience question, I think is gonna be interesting
before we move on to the testing of this whole system.
So out in the audience, Slovak asks,
what do you think about simple distributed
radio astronomy experiments for like citizen science?
Are they possible?
That's a very good question.
Yes, they are.
It's possible to do amateur radio astronomy using relatively affordable SDR dongles.
SDR standing for software defined radio.
It's been a little while since I've looked at this, I must confess.
As I've mentioned earlier, since I do this professionally, I don't bother with it that
much as a hobby anymore.
You have a square kilometer array you're building.
Exactly.
I've got a big telescope at work.
I don't need a small one at home.
But you can do science.
It's difficult in most practical cases because most people live in cities where there's a
lot of interference.
But it definitely can be done.
One of the fun projects that I've seen has been using a satellite dish like what you
would connect to satellite TV, but with a little bit of electronic knowledge.
And you don't need a degree, you can just be on a hobbyist level to do that.
You can build a square law receiver, so it's very much just, is there signal or isn't there,
you're not going to be decoding any TV streams.
But you can measure, for example, the temperature of the sun using this, and you can measure
its angular dimensions by simply pointing it and then letting the sun drift through
a few times.
So there are fun projects that can be done.
As to say whether it can be useful as citizen science, in other words, useful from a scientific
point of view over more than just something interesting to do, I'd have to go and have
a look.
I'm not 100% sure.
It's very difficult to get meaningful results without very, very expensive equipment.
That's why we've got such expensive facilities being built.
One thing you did point out, I can't remember which of the two talks it was, but you did
say that you can go and rent at least optical telescopes remotely, right?
Yes, so most optical telescopes are operated remotely, but a lot of ones that are commercially
available as well, head over to telescopes.com and you can buy ones that can be electronically
controlled.
And those you can do interesting, is it telescopes or telescope.com?
Yeah, that's the one.
You can buy ones that are electronically controlled.
And those can actually be useful for citizen science.
There's a lot of, for example, astronomy organizations that do regular observations of variable stars
or binary stars, and they rely a lot on data submitted by amateurs.
any particular observation will not necessarily be that useful, but in aggregate thousands of
these observations are very helpful for doing the science that they would be doing then.
That could typically be run by university faculty and they would aggregate these observations over
long periods of time from different locations to draw some scientific conclusions about what's
happening with these stars. So yeah, it's a good question though. Yeah it is indeed. Thanks. So
let's talk about the testing side. So you said that... Yeah, go ahead. Yeah, well just
sorry to sort of jump the gun, but coming from my sort of engineering background,
one of the sort of key questions that you've got to ask as an engineer is
If you have specifications for a system to build, to design,
at what point do you know that it's doing the thing
that it's expected to do?
So you've got a certain set of user requirements.
The user needs to be able to have this level of sensitivity
and this level of bandwidth and accuracy.
- Less than the specified. - In terms of hard--
- Or something, yeah.
- Exactly, in terms of hard numbers.
So you need to have some sort of way to prove
that the system that you've designed and built
is gonna meet those specifications.
And so testing is a fundamental part of that.
Sometimes you can prove by analysis,
just by using maths and showing
this is what the system is designed to do.
But the first prize is if you can run a test and say,
look, we've got a controlled set of inputs,
we can measure the outputs,
and we can determine from this that the system is doing
what we said it is doing and how well it is.
So what the noise level is
what the sensitivity is, whatever the case is. And that's something that is
often a little bit neglected in scientific projects, particularly
astronomy, that's the one that I've got experience with, but other fields
I've seen as well. Often physicists and astronomers are very, very clever and
they're trained in a lot of fields. They tend to build their own instruments and
hardware and write their own software. And it has a kind of amateurish
aspect to it sometimes, not universally but this is the tendency, until it's
more or less doing what the researcher wants and then he carries on. So many a
software project has been written by a PhD student, he's generated some
results and you know published his paper, gotten his PhD, but that's
very difficult to scrutinize because the code is written by someone and the logic
lives in someone's head. And so I'm kind of keen on this this concept of testing
because I think it adds a level of rigor and transparency to the scientific
process because if I've got tests in place then anyone can come along and
look at how I've tested my instrument and you know criticize or
evaluate whether it actually does what I what I say it does when I publish my
research. So I think the concept is really important.
I see too and it's in open source one of the important signals that people use
when they go and look at a package they might consider like PyCuda or Pandas or
whatever is does this thing have tests as part of its design? If I'm
gonna depend on somebody else's library or if I'm a maintainer and I create a
library and someone's going to send me a PR, how do I know whether their changes
that they're suggesting to me broke something I didn't see coming, right?
And having unit tests or some kind of test typically driven with pytest for
Python is really important, not just supporting pillar of that project, but
also a signal to others from the outside.
Like this thing, people care about this.
They've, they've verified it.
They want to keep it strong.
And it sounds to me like this might also be really important for science in the same way.
You talked about people coming to review your work or to try to reproduce it.
And if they see the test and they can run the test, it communicates something additional rather
than just, "Well, I thought a lot about it.
Here's my graph."
>> Exactly, yes.
You know, we want to do groundbreaking science and we want to be able to say
that when we make observations that what we're seeing is real science and it's
not just some sort of anomaly that we found in the telescope signal
chain. And the presence of good tests helps with that because
then we have rigorous testing that we can say look this is
the performance characteristics of our system. It gives a
little bit of extra confidence in your scientific results that way.
Indeed, so how does this look different than like testing Flask or something, right?
Because it's not exactly the same and you maybe are leaning on it a
little bit more to communicate more information, not just pass or fail.
There are a few things. In one sense, we do use unit tests in the
same way that a lot of open source projects do.
Does each individual component of my module do the thing that I've designed it to do?
But if you go a little bit beyond that, the same sort of philosophy and application can
be applied to systems as a whole.
If you have a complicated system with a lot of different parts talking to each other,
can be tricky to, a change that you make might not break if you look at it in
isolation, but do those interfaces still work? If you're unit testing
something, often you mock out whatever's at the end, so you'll
pretend that you'll get a real response from a website when you do an API
call, but if you've touched the code that actually handles that API call, then your
unit test is not going to pick that up. So we've got a relatively rigorous
process for what one might call integration testing. So an entire
system gets set up in a simulated environment, but any input like it
might get from a real telescope, and the ability to watch that
output. And so we do that on a regular basis. We spin up an entire correlator
in a system in the lab, give it a deterministic input, and so we can measure the output and
determine whether or not it meets the criteria.
Yeah, cool. Is this like a software emulator in Docker or is this an actual one of your
1U FPGA things that's dedicated to this integration test?
integration testing? It can be both, it can be both. So we've used the same
approach to testing the old Scarab correlator. One of the
Scarabs can be configured to emulate a telescope, so it can produce a signal
similar to what a telescope might be, except not having astronomical signals
in the data it would have a deterministic signal such as you know a
normal frequency tone or just white noise depending on what kind of test we
want to run on the... You don't replay the wow signal to it? We could but it's
faster just to generate signals and you're not going to get a with a
strongly deterministic signal in other words if you know exactly what you're
putting in, you can see what you're getting out as well.
The wow signal, not as useful for determining the noise level.
More fun, not as useful.
Yeah.
So, one of the things you did is you changed some of the output from pytest to be more
representative of talking about how you've met your requirements and stuff.
Maybe tell folks about how that works.
Yeah, so that was an interesting exercise
because so Serraio uses a process
called systems engineering,
which was developed in Bell Labs, I think in the 40s.
It was quite a while ago,
and it's been strongly influenced
by the sort of military processes.
People in a software environment
would recognize it as like a waterfall pattern
where you'd have a big design up front.
So you'd have a lengthy analysis of what the requirements
of your system are, and allocated different performance
characteristics to different components.
And once you've done with the design,
you need reams and reams of documentation to prove
that your design meets the specifications as well.
Graphs, tables, pictures, numbers,
all of these kinds of things.
pytest and other packages, there are other ones,
but pytest is the one that we've used,
has a much more simple output.
In other words, it'll give you lots of details
if something goes wrong.
It'll give you a stack trace,
it'll give you debug information
of what the variables were at the time
that there was a problem,
or that the assertion didn't meet.
But if everything passes,
- It's all green.
- Okay, we're good to go.
- We're good to go.
- Okay, the sensitivity is better than X,
but how much better?
and you know how does that vary with frequency and these kinds of things what we'd like to know and
what we'd like to be able to present to the various stakeholders that are interested in the
performance of the telescope. So we have a system, okay you need to zoom out a little bit there,
and for those of you who are watching on YouTube I do apologize for the,
it's difficult to put code on a screen in a way that's not going to put your audience to sleep.
Yeah and I just grabbed this off of your talk just so we had something to like kind of be
be talking about. You have this interesting reporting aspect that runs along with your
test. Yes, so pytest has a plugin called ReportLog and that if you sort of squint
at it and look a little bit carefully, it allows you to kind of record metadata as
you're going along, so things that are happening in your test. So there's
several things happening at once here and maybe if I could just take a step
back this test that you've got up is a test of linearity. So what does
that mean is that if I put in a signal X and I get an output Y, so if I put in a
signal 2X I should get 2Y as the output so that they should be directly
proportional to the other and if they're not then there's a non-linearity
of some sort in the system. No system is perfectly linear so there will be some
sort of margin for error. We don't have a specific spec on this particular
linearity test, but it's a quick one to run because it takes only a few minutes and it
can give us a sort of a first eyeball of are things working as we expect them to do.
pytest, if for those of you who are not familiar with it, the tests are written in the same
syntax as Python functions, except where the inputs of the function are either parameters
of fixtures. So parameters can be, you know, if there's a parameter space over
which your test will run, so in our case for example different numbers of
frequency channels, different numbers of antennas, this one isn't parameterized, it
uses only a few fixtures. The fixtures are things to ensure that you have a
test that is reproducible. So in this case the correlator fixture gives us a
correlator, it spins up in the test cluster that we've got in our lab
and it gives, so the type into there gives you the hint that we're getting
a remote control, so that little correlator object there gives us the
ability to communicate with it and control it. The next one is a receiver,
so that's, you know, if a correlator is running you need to be able to
receive what it's outputting, so that you can compare it against whatever
the spec is. And the third one is the PDF report. So the name is a bit of a
misnomer. Initially I, so that little fixture is written using a module called
PyLatex, so shout out to the authors of that one, it's very useful. And the
best way to generate, you can generate PDFs directly from Python, but it's very
low level and it's difficult, so we use LaTeX as a kind of intermediate step. To
do the typesetting and PDF generation for that. So with that you can focus on
actually just getting the content and then use LaTeX to arrange things
and typeset and make sure that there's you know the lines wrap over and what
have you. So that's the ultimately there the output will be a PDF with
with a report of the test as it's run. So this is the configuration that we ran,
and these are the steps that we followed,
and these are our results.
Version two of that uses an intermediate product,
so instead of outputting a PDF straight away,
we just serialize the data
and put it into a little JSON dictionary.
The reason for that is sometimes in LaTeX,
you've gotta tweak your formatting or something like that,
and it would be nice to not have to rerun the entire test
just to change the font or update the heading,
and so there's actually an intermediate step,
and there's another step just later
that takes that JSON, pauses it,
and generates the PDF later.
- Right, well, you can also ask questions about it, right?
You can analyze the test JSON,
and maybe draw averages over time,
or here's how much it's varied
as we've evolved our system, right?
Not just pass/fail, what did this one look like?
So JSON's pretty good. - Exactly.
And when you incorporate this with other CI/CD tools,
GitHub Actions or Jenkins or whatever the case is, you can do this repeatedly and then you have
records of over time how your system has evolved versus what changes you've made
and it makes it much easier to reason about and understand the performance of your system
and how it changes over time. I think that's really neat. I don't see that being done very often
at all and I think it's easy to look at this little bit of code that you put up in your
presentation and say oh okay well that's pytest and here's a fixture and so on but like
think about what those fixtures are doing you know one of those one of those fixtures maybe
is controlling one of those one you FPGA machines to set it up right and then the other one is in
our there's a lot of power and stuff going on with these little you know here's a variable
- Exactly. - Or a correlator.
- Exactly.
Yeah, so you're right.
There is a lot of code hidden behind here.
But it's code that you're gonna run every time.
So it doesn't matter what test you're doing,
you're gonna wanna spin up a correlator.
And whether it's an FPGA or a GPU,
doesn't really matter.
You wanna run through the same sort of steps
so that your test is repeatable
and that the result corresponds to the input
that you give it.
And so the pytest fixtures are great for that
because once they allow you to get the boring stuff done,
once you're confident that you're doing it right,
then you can just keep doing it.
So you use the same correlator fixture for every test,
and if there's an update, if something changes,
if there's a change to the hardware that you need,
or the protocol that communicate with them,
then you can update it just in one place,
and all of your tests will benefit
from that update straight away.
Yeah, it's a very powerful aspect of pytest.
You've taken it to quite a level here.
- One of the things that I kind of wanted to,
when I did the talk last year,
that I wanted to put forward is that,
you know, these concepts of testing,
you can apply them to real world systems as well.
So if you can talk to it,
then you can use pytest to test it.
If you can talk to it over the network,
if a serial cable or USB or something like that,
you can test actual hardware, make it do things, so that you can qualify it.
It's not just restricted to little toy pieces of software, your flask or your tornado, or
abstract conceptual things that live in the cloud somewhere. It can actually translate
to real world things.
People say when they talk about tests and stuff, they say, "Well, look, it is -- sometimes
they say it is your documentation or it is the way you verify things are working."
But when you get to the engineering and the science level and you're trying to verify
physical things and stuff, it's cool to see how far you can push it to maybe even answer
that question better, right?
Like with this reporting, for example, over time.
I think it makes it more transparent as well.
In the open source community, we like to quote Linus' law a lot, we say with enough eyeballs
all bugs are shallow.
But if we're honest with ourselves, not everyone is going to go and read the code.
But on the other hand, if you can see a graph of, this is the frequency response of the
system, that makes it much easier for interested parties to actually interrogate and say, "Look,
is this good or is it lacking in some aspects?"
So from that point of view, I think it just increases the transparency and allows not
only yourself but the sort of the general the wider scientific community
to have more confidence in the in the performance of your of your telescope
makes it more approachable to I think exactly yeah people maybe wouldn't read
a unit test and what the heck are they supposed to make out of it anyway you
know they may well get a graph that was generated by the unit test right exactly
exactly yeah and this is it much more it's much easier for me to pass as well
because you know I get to the office in the morning and you know the CI run is
done overnight and I can see at a glance you know are things working the way that
they should. Yeah cool. What has been the reaction from other scientists and
engineers when you talked about this? How's this perceived broadly? It's been
relatively positive. Scientists want to know when they can get time on the
telescope and then I have to tell them well there's a committee that
evaluates scientific proposals, we can't short-circuit that unfortunately.
Beercat has gotten a lot of attention from scientists who are
interested in radio astronomy, particularly fields like pulsars and
another of our clients, is possibly the wrong word, but is the
project called Breakthrough Listen. If you've heard of SETI, it's the
same crowd that are trying to search for extraterrestrial intelligence. And
sometimes they're interested in these kinds of things, sometimes not.
Often it's a much shorter question of like, "Is it working and can I
get some of the data?" If the answer of those two is yes, and
they start looking at the data, then you know there's performance figures and
and test results are sometimes more interesting to them.
>> Sure.
>> But generally it's quite well received.
>> It seems like a cool idea to me.
Do you have, you know, time on telescopes is really precious
and rare, hard to come by.
The more powerful the telescope,
I imagine the more contention there is for that time.
Is there a bunch of simulation and software and things
that people can, that you can hand out to these folks
so they can work with beforehand,
so they become more prepared?
- Yes, and well, it mostly consists,
it depends on what you're interested in.
Meerkat has an interesting architecture
in that there are some of the clients
that have hardware right on site
that are subscribing to data and processing it in real time
and Breakthrough Listen is one of them.
You know, they're interested in very, very fast transient stuff.
Other scientists are more, they're not in as much of a hurry.
They're more interested in the end result, the output of the correlator.
That has been through several stages of pre-processing.
And it depends on what kind of science that they're doing.
And so, as with most telescopes certainly, but scientific instruments
in general, we keep all of the data from observations of past.
Typically there's an embargo on that, so it could be a period of 12 to 24 months, to allow
the original originating scientist of the observation enough time to do his analysis
and publish his papers.
But once that is lifted, then that data is available to basically anyone who wants to
use it.
So all that we need to do is contact us and we can give them access to historical data
sets.
And they can begin to test their algorithms on actual historical observations.
Yeah, that seems good. Excellent. All right, a quick question, follow-up question here before we kind of wrap things up.
James asks, what happens to the raw data? Talking about coming out the correlator, I suppose.
How much of it is captured and stored versus processed down and then storing the result?
Okay, so as I mentioned earlier,
each
telescope generates data at about
35 gigabits per second. That is impractical to store. We have logic on site that will
buffer up a few seconds worth of data and then they have algorithms that are searching
through it for interesting things. And if there's something that they notice, there's
a mechanism to dump that to disk, so just a few seconds at a time. And that happens
a few times a year.
Generally the most interesting pieces are a little bit more downstream.
So 35 gigabits per second times 64 is a large number, so that's north of 2 terabits per
second that the antennas themselves generate.
The output of a 64 antenna correlator is about 4 gigabits per second.
So you could ingest that on a Mac Mini if you somehow had a USB for to...
Just somewhere there to keep plugging and unplugging drives really quickly.
To Ethernet, yeah, you'd need to do it pretty quickly, but that is practical.
That we have a storage cluster.
So we have one on site in the desert in South Africa.
It's relatively small, only about five petabytes, but that acts as a cache.
And then there is a fiber link to Cape Town where we have a data center with a much larger
archive.
That uses an object store, I believe it's Ceph, which is also an open source thing.
And I'm speaking a little bit outside of my expertise now, but that data is retained then,
well so far in perpetuity, we haven't gotten to the stage where we need to start deleting
old data yet, so we've got all of the observations that we've ever run.
And they range in size, it depends on the observation, but sometimes they're a few gigabytes
and sometimes they're sort of many terabytes in size.
Cool.
So, yeah.
Yeah, it's a lot of data.
You wouldn't store the two terabit per second though, that's too much.
No, that's one of the reasons that the correlator exists, to sort of get that down to a manageable,
useful level.
Yeah.
Indeed.
All right.
All right, well, anything else you want to add that we haven't talked about
briefly about this testing side of things? We covered it pretty well.
I think, so the one thing that we haven't kind of talked about is,
we talked a little bit about earlier about the how critical the performance of this is,
and one of the things that testing has really enabled is for us to
optimize the performance of the system, and in a way that's I think not immediately obvious.
If you have a first naive implementation of your signal processing algorithm that's easy to read,
easy to reason about, it's not likely to be the fastest possible way to process the data.
But it's good to have that, and then once you have that, then you can write a test for it.
So you can compare a known input to a known output and see if your maths is correct. That way,
when you iterate, perhaps we can change the memory access patterns or improve the
of the coordination between the threads.
It's very easy when you do that to make a mistake
and start messing up your results.
But when you have a unit test,
and you start messing up results,
you can catch it straight away.
And so having that testing in place
allows us a little bit of room to experiment
to really push this to the limits
of what these GPUs are capable of doing
in terms of increasing bandwidth
or more antennas that we can process
or all these kinds of things.
And you mentioned regressions earlier,
that's also an excellent thing.
So you're working on another part of a system
and something breaks, having these tests in place
will let you know we've messed something up,
let's revert back and be a little bit more careful next time.
So I think it's just a great concept.
In industry, in science, in academia,
everyone would benefit from having
more and better tests in place.
It's not a panacea.
You're not gonna anticipate all possible failure modes
in your tests, but it definitely helps catch
many of the obvious ones.
- Yeah, good advice.
Testing science is tricky.
It's usually a stream of numbers in some way.
It's not, yes, there was a user, no, it came back none,
or there was an exception.
It's still shooting out a bunch of numbers.
Are they good?
Maybe they're better, I don't know, right?
But having systems in place to record them,
to test them and say, if it matches this curve
within some tolerance, it's still good, right?
- Yes.
- It's really important in those areas
because it's so hard to look at it and know what the deal is.
- Exactly.
And I mean, so it is a team effort.
There's not necessarily any one person
that's gonna have the experience to do all of these things.
So the person who is a very experienced systems engineer
who will know the methods
by which we can evaluate the performance
is not necessarily going to be the best coder.
So that's why we have a large team
in order to pull all of these things in.
So yes, so shout out to my colleagues at Sereo.
We're doing good work.
Or at least I like to think we are.
- It sure seems like it.
Cool, all right, well, we're about out of time
to talk more about this.
So let me ask you the final two questions
before you get out of here.
If you're gonna write some Python code
for this crazy big system you built,
What editor do you use?
- I'm a bit old school.
I basically just use Vim.
- Vim, right on.
- I feel most comfortable in the terminal,
so no fancy GUIs for me.
- Yeah, there you go.
And then notable PyPI package,
do you wanna give a shout out to?
- Well, a couple of ones that I've already mentioned.
pytest is very important.
PyCUDA has also been critical in our work so far.
So yeah, shout out to those two.
And thanks to open source community
for providing that for us.
- Yeah, it's really cool how much of these
general open source projects are supporting science
and other types of exploration.
- Cool.
- Yeah, okay, final call to action.
People are interested in maybe adopting
some of your practices.
Maybe they wanna learn more about how you did this
reporting in pytest.
even as someone in the audience asks, you know, can they get access, how do they
get access to the datasets potentially? What do you tell them?
The datasets, well I hope you have a very big hard drive on your laptop.
So if you go to sereo.ac.za there'll be a contact page and if you can send us a
question and we'll make sure that it gets to the right person. I'm not sure
what the procedure is for access for people outside, I can get to it when I want to, but
then I'm inside the organization.
But if you ask the question on our contact page, yeah, and then we'll send you to the
right place.
To learn more, I'll put the GitHub link to the software for the correlator.
It's all there and the documentation is relatively good.
If there's something that's missing,
you're welcome to just raise an issue on the GitHub repo
and then we'll see how we can help.
- Excellent.
Well, thanks for sharing your story
and keep up the good work.
- Michael, yeah, thanks very much.
It's been great to be here.
- Yeah, it has been great to talk to you.
See you all later.
- Cheers.